served our country both past and present first national bank, a Franklin family community
bank, proudly sponsors veterans of the Valley. Since 1862, first national has provided
local decision making and accessibility, as well as banking products and services to
browser's valley citizens.
Welcome to Veteran to the Valley. I'm Tom Turbivill. Four months may not seem like
the long time to most of us but for Bob Bruner of the first squadron, Fourth Cavalry,
US Army, the four months starting on New Year's Day of 1991 was a period in
time he'll never forget. Bob Bruner drove a Humvee in Operation Desert Storm's
Ground War and he saw the war up close from start indeed to finish. It was his
unit that took the airfield, it's soft one Iraq where the ceasefire was
negotiated. It's a remarkable story of service and we welcome Sergeant Bob Bruner
to Veteran to the Valley. Bob it is indeed a pleasure to have you here. I want
to get you right to the Gulf War. New Year's Day 1991 you actually celebrated
the New Year when midnight you were flying to Saudi Arabia from Brussels and I
think you said the plane was over Ireland at the time right? Yeah the the
pilot of the plane we flew over on and there were a lot of civilian pilots flew
over volunteer force told us that if we looked over the right wing we'd see the
lights of Ireland and if there was any place in the world we'd rather be that
would be a good place to be right now and I would have to agree with that. Indeed
but you landed at King Fod field in Saudi Arabia and the first thing that you
remember you got out you'd been you'd come from a cold area it was mighty hot
in Saudi Arabia as one can imagine. Yeah we flew out of a four-shield Pika
Kansas and there was a blizzard going on and when we landed in King Fod
field in Saudi Arabia just outside of Dahran it was all probably 80 90
degrees and we had full full winter clothing on at that time and looking for a
place to get out of it. You bust a place called Kobar Tower which you call the
MGM Grand it was kind of a high-rise condo complex with no furniture but it
was a place to sleep and sort of get over the jet lag. Talk about what what
happened after that after you left Kobar towers and sort of take us from there
into the start of the war. We left Kobar towers after our vehicles all arrived
and moved took a very long convoy up to northern Saudi Arabia it was a very
very long convoy it took all day and and went up through the early evening. About 13
hours I think you said. About 13 hours yes we pulled and kind of circled our
our vehicles kind of like the old cavities do circling the wagons we kind of
circled the vehicles around cut some cut some shut-eye. We set up the
forward area for the Cavalry first one and fourth Cavalry was the
called TA Roosevelt which is a tactical assembly area and that's where we
started getting off our equipment and ourselves ready in case what did
happen pursued and of course the war started. Now you talked about the vehicles
that showed up let's let's go back to the states these are vehicles that you
had actually had a part in preparing to come over as far as painting camouflage
things like that. All of our vehicles were painted in a a woodland camouflage the
green and the black and the tan and of course that was set up for European
theater and we went from and one weekend drove the whole squadron down to a
paint shop kind of like I told you like an Earl Shies paint shop and you had to
put grease and tape on the windows where they painted over it we had our desert
chemo painted in our vehicles and then they rail headed from Fort Riley
Kansas down to Port Arthur, Texas where they were put on on transports and
shipped overseas. It was an idea of Saudi Arabia and sort of what it was like you
lots of sand to deal with this as one would imagine. Lots of sand and it was the
flattest place I've ever seen in my life even worse than Kansas and the sand
air was really powdered almost like a nestle quick you know type of powder very
very fine powdered sand with about about a foot or any that solid rock and very
hard to dig foxholes and fighting positions and things like that. Right right and
you had to protect yourself from the sand so you needed sort of unique
equipment for that. Yeah we got to realize the sand was so fine we had we had no
notice and usually when you have people over there you'll hear how things are
but we got over there and we found out well our weapons were getting very very
dirty very quick but it's very fine powdered sand so we requested pantyhose and
plastic bags and items that we're going to protect our our weapons especially the
pantyhose were just they worked amazing in keeping the dust and the sand
off the bolts and the magazine covers and so on so forth. Right not just weapons
but any type of electronics and anything it would protect. I had a yeah all the
you know the plastic bags were really good for the tape recorder tape
quarters are pretty popular over there because we set tapes back to our
families. Right right take us on a little bit closer to when the air
war started which a lot of people can recall that date sort of where they were
in January 15th 1991 but before that you talked to me about a berm and in a
flat land a berm obviously stands out. Yeah very very like I said very very
flat terrain there and we it was getting closer to the deadline and so we
moved further north we moved up to the neutral zone which Iraq when they went
into Kuwait the neutral zone is the diamond triangle shape part of the
country that's in between Saudi Arabia Kuwait and Iraq and the Iraqi army
had went ahead and occupied the neutral zone and the engineers had one up to
keep them from coming in further put up a humongous wall 12 15 foot tall wall of
dirt and sand and rock and and probably about 12 12 15 foot wide I'd deep I
would say and we were there for the for the first start of it and of course then
when Jim Becker went over to Geneva to talk to the Iraqi delegation about
possibly having a ceasefire and I didn't have to see fire but peace talks before
the war started we pulled back for a for a few days and of course when the
Iraqi delegation said they were gonna set up the peace talks we moved up
north again a lot of the time though when you were there just sort of in a
waiting mode you weren't just sitting around playing football playing volleyball
you're training you there were a lot of training there was a lot of training to
be done to get ready for what might happen as far as enemy recognition things
like that sort of talk about the the constant training you were doing to
prepare well from the time we landed at the Kubar towers till till till the
air war started until the ground were started training was taken very seriously
from what young soldiers are like young kids today they don't take a lot of
things seriously until things happen to you go to the gas chamber or something
like that experience that but actually that the younger soldiers were demanding
more training they wanted to feel more secure and have a understanding we had a
lot of new equipment that was issued us that we had never had before the
Magellan GPS is what we drive around the day with the the Tom Tom's and so on
so forth we experienced that very for the first time when we were there we
had the Magellan was called the Magellan GPS we were unfamiliar with it and
didn't do a lot of good in the middle of desert other than giving you one
grid point to the next but NBC training weapons qualification still continued
constant upcheek of equipment our M1 Abrams tanks went through retro armor
outfit while we were there within a two or three week period so it was a
constant training and constantly upgrading our equipment it's hard to believe
it's been 17 years since that air ride January 15th 1991 early 18 years now but
I would imagine that anybody in their in their upper 20s or at least 30
years old probably can remember where they were at least on the you know on
the stateside watching television that night I know I personally was up all
night long watching I guess I guess CNN was the the main network of a choice
there as far as 24 hour coverage of it but that night talk about the
perspective that you had the night that the the air war started in deserts
storm well the night the air war started in desert storm we were we were in a
camp and we knew something was going to happen we didn't know exactly when we
knew the deadline was coming up and at 12 o'clock that time I'm not sure what
time it was back in our state was late or earlier today but but we had
aircraft over are we at the call to go to all our fighting positions so we all
went out to our foxholes and as we're running out there the F-16s and the F-15s
were flying right dead over camps at a combat flight level I remember so
that we had a soldier of mine had a 60 the M-60 machine gun was taking the M-60
machine gun out to the fighting position he didn't have his chin strap on
and the blues helmet off the suction from the from the jets flying over and
so everybody kind of chained up the straps and gotten a fighting
positions because you're like two or three feet deeper than you were standing
on top of the ground being there so very very interesting we heard the
bombers fly over and at night we'd we'd sit there where we're in a fighting
position you could feel the ground thump feel the concussion from the bombs
they were dropping on some of the airfields just on the other side of the
border like so we were still quite a waste from bagged out that time I doubt it
was bagged in we were we were amazed on the pitchers we saw that come through
the Stars and Stripes newspaper that we got that still came to us periodically
during the war the pictures of bagged out and all the all the N.I. air fire and
so and so forth that was happening there in the videos I saw but when I got
back I was so rather impressed that we didn't lose more than we did right but
it was a very very successful campaign if it we wouldn't have had a successful
campaign in the air we would not have had a successful ground campaign right you
talked about the well that has been on as we get closer to the air to the
ground war let's go ahead and go there February 21 1991 that was the day that
the ground war started talk about what your role was as a as a humvee driver
well I was the NBC which is nuclear biological and chemical squadron NBC and
CO and my secondary duty over there was the driver's training in CO and I drove
the the squadron maintenance officer and I drove the squadron NBC officer and
then I also drove for a few other staff positional officers that were
there some lieutenant and so and so forth that worked for the squadron commander
took in the meetings and so and so forth the main job is NBC at the camp was
to make sure all the monitors and alarms were set up and prepared in case
something did go off that we would do what we had to do by running our test
you know the night that the ground war started we talked about this
yesterday we were sitting up at the berm and and that night we knew that we
were going to have a situation where the squadron commander and the squadron
sergeant major said you don't need everybody get sleep tonight you and all your
soldiers we had MPs in that were the perimeter because not even a quarter a
mile away from us with us was this berm on the other side of this berm was
Iraqi soldiers and fighting positions and then the artillery and
MLRS units moved up in the middle of the night about two o'clock in the
morning they they started letting loose tell them about MLRS is multi-lotters
rockets is not a long rocket system just something that I had never experienced
that before I've experienced the 105 Howard serves and things like that by
doing training with them at the National Training Center in California but it
was my first experience with MLRS and it was the prettiest firework show you
ever see and you know what and he kept you up at night too right yeah I mean
we were hard to sleep we probably would sit up most of the night talking before
things happen out of the non-commissioned officers did and and that night we
probably just started buzzing out and it's probably about two o'clock when when
all that stuff started taking off and of course you couldn't sleep through that
when we visited you talked about the helicopter the Apache the Black Hawk's
the Cobras and they really saved your bacon on more than one occasion the
job that these that is aircraft dead which is incredible yeah the being in
a cavalry we had our primary vehicles were the M1 Abrams M3 Bradley vehicle of
course we had multiple M577s which were tactical meeting vehicles but our
biggest savior there Verna's kind of conflict was the the Apache's the
Cobras and the Black Hawks and of course there were still some Hueys and OH-58
Delta's which is a K.O.W. Warrior that the scouts use yeah the the
Apache's and the Cobras were very very much saved our bacon and very
impressive to watch is that right very impressive to watch you know we we
seen that we seen the Abrams tanks and so on so forth go through and we knew
what they were capable of doing a lot of us didn't get to have life fire
exercises with our with our air crews and that was amazing to watch you were
obviously impressed about the organization of the United States the Allied
forces the enemy was pretty impressed also weren't it yeah I think the
over they were very I mean the coalition forces that we have were very
overwhelming to them we knew that the Iraqi army was going to be a tough
army we just weren't sure how tough they just come out of what 10 year 8 to 10
year war with Iran so they were very combat veteran trained and we had
hadn't had a lot of experience since Grenada and that was usually most
that was special forces special ops that took care of that so we were really an
untested army at that time and with that training Roy proved to really help
let's go to some photographs right now and they will come back and we'll visit
some more some of the pictures that Bob Brunner has supplied to us we talked about
the berm this is the berm yeah that's about that that's about that 15-foot tall
berm and he's about probably about three or four foot up standing up taking a
picture of me up and at this time we had this picture we didn't realize that
there was an enemy Iraqi soldiers probably another 25 foot on the other side
there in firing positions because I mean it went about another 10 or 15
about another 10 foot behind me there that you could walk on and of course we
found we saw the fighting positions when the ground were started you're smiling
for the photo yeah yeah Sergeant Major kind of got on us after this picture
here so what are you idiots doing yeah because the enemy's watching you too okay
let's move on next photograph this is myself one of our maintenance
inceos and another one of the scouts for the for the calf and we're one of our
setup areas here those are the Bradley's on a perimeter back behind us of course
was camouflage not the green camouflage did a lot of good out in the middle
desert but we were coming back or going to a meeting at this time okay next
one but me and a buddy of mine another Sergeant Dave Woolman and this is his
decent half truck he had with supplies in the back of it this is on the way
going back home because you notice we don't have any flak vest or no weapons or
anything honest this is probably right at the border by wrecking Saudi
Arabia going back home and getting ready to come down from everything okay these
were some of the first peel to ABS captured during desert storm these gentlemen
were noticed come walking up into our perimeter we went to our fighting
positions because we didn't know how many people there were going to be I think
there was like four PLWs here and if this picture right here is our medical
officer medical personnel checking out the PLWs because we were very we treated
our PLWs very well this is actually one of our checkpoints we had up in Iraq
not too far from from Err in between Al-Nazari and Basra not probably about
50 to 75 miles away from Baghdad we had a lot of civilians walking out in
middle desert and we had to investigate what what deal was and kind of find out
they had met military credentials they were trying to get out of their uniform
so they wouldn't be combatties so and at that time we were still taking
PLWs we brought them in of course once they saw us we were all best buddies
and they just love President Bush oh absolutely we got another picture of
them smiling and oh yeah peace on and this right here they're saying we love
Bush so they were they were very happy that they they were captured by us and
not by Sodom exactly exactly okay this promotion this is the day I got
promoted to Staff Sergeant okay I wanted to include that one you had mentioned Err
which is a place of a biblical history and talk a little bit about it and
this is this is this is up by the Euphrates River in Iraq and didn't realize
how biblical that part of Iraq was and our chap on told us there's a the
Zurgat of Err is there and so we all went and it's in the book of Genesis of
you are as an Err and we went there and it was just an amazing place and just
outside of that is what they call Abraham City let's go to the next picture
as a matter and that's me standing with with the with the guide we had was an
Iraqi guide that that does noses whole area and it's worked with all the
archaeologists this is area right here where they found a scroll that dealt with
Abraham and what they pretty much think is Abraham's house wow very
impressive this is we're gonna talk about this a little bit later we referred to
it in the opening this was at the Safwan airfield where the cease fire was
negotiated this is from a book called the Road to Safwan this photograph you're
not in this picture but I just thought this was an impressive photograph now
those are all my quarter horse buddies though that's a C-True 1st
Guadalajorth cavalry we had a press day after Safwan and we'll get into that
in a minute thank you know basically the whole airfield was set up with
nothing but quarter horse or 1st Guadalajorth cavalry vehicles and it's
this is so happen this is Charlie Troop and this is them they're at their at
their in front of one of their cobras right the operation your operation
change you got orders to go to Kuwait talk about that and it was sort of
during this time that you really got to see the the ugly ugly underbelly of
war and the horror of war also sort of talk about these change of orders
yeah being in a cabin we were part of the first amphibious division and
and which is a time-honored division it's been involved in most every conflict
there is and being in one of the most decorated units in history was a real
privilege and an honor to be with us and we we led the first amphibious division
in the seventh core into Iraq once we got into Iraq the orders changed it said
you guys are going to Kuwait so we cut across no roads all across country and
it was late at night we got just got in broken to the the borders of Kuwait we
had some small arms fire and some tanks were going on like I said the
Apache's and the cobras really took care of us with the night vision goggles
took a little bit of artillery nothing nothing nothing too close to work close
to worry about but we saw these lights in the in a horizon and I'm like man
maybe there's a truck stop down there we'll get a hamburger or something you
know and you just kind of forget where you're at and kind of find out as the
more drove it was the oil fires that the Iraq Army had knocked all the heads
off the wells and set up their own oil on fire the Kuwaiti oil on fire because
if they they couldn't have it then when he bells to have it right we came
across the four-way interstate and it's called the Kuwait City Bosch-Raw
highway and there we encountered the the from what the aircraft that
taking care of all the Kuwaiti so I mean the Iraqi army that was told to
leave had finally started leaving but they were bottled next up on the
interstates and probably about a half mile deep or in about five miles you know
one way or the other from one into the north and south on the highway on the
interstate there was nothing but vehicles that night we had saw the the
Air Force and the Marine Corps pilots and the Navy pilots come in and they
really did a lot of destruction on the highway right and of course you know
that the Iraq Army did their share of fire and back at the aircraft and if they
went and fired back the aircraft let us go in it may not have proceeded
what it did but they were still being combative so indeed indeed let's talk about
soft one the orders to take the airfield at soft one and you found out that this
was very important because this is where the ceasefire was going to be
negotiated we were about 50 miles in front of the first infirm division and we
right when we got to the Boswark Quake City there was a lot of death and
destruction and we spent some time there bearing soldiers and giving proper
burials and marking the graves because you can't have bodies around we moved
out we got orders to take soft one airfield which was at the border of
Quate in Iraq very pinpointed very small place we wonder what was so
important about it but the whole 24th Republican Guard was protecting that
airfield so we moved up in the afternoon and to get to the evening time my
squadron commander talked to the Iraqi general Colonel that was on the
other end of the radio and our squadron commander just demanded he leave the
airfield immediately they didn't want to leave so front of me at first there
was some smaller and fire went back and forth couple Bradley shots it was
asked again you know you need to leave they chose still not to leave squadron
commander called in the Apache's in the in the the Cobras and they flew over
the hovered over the airfield over the Bradley's and all of a sudden the
Iraqi Colonel or General whatever he was gone on saying okay we're leaving you
know you got to give us 45 minutes as he says now you got a half hour so they
started backing off and moving off the airfield we kept your soft one airfield
kind of find out soft one airfield was a the prime point where the cease
fire was signed within a day or two General Schwarzkopf flew in talked to our
unit and graduated us on a job well done and told us we had to get the airfield
ready for this is where this the cease-fire talks we're gonna be held at we
moved a bunch of enemy equipment up surrounding the airfield and when General
Schwarzkopf came up again he says boys he says you know I wanted to let the Iraqi
army know that we were serious not in baryson so we had to move some of that
equipment back off and that the next day General Schwarzkopf flew in with his
his bodyguards and his detail on and four four black hawks and that same day the
Iraqi delegation drove up in a convoy surrounded by Bradley's the patches and
in Cobras it was an Iraqi general that came in and talked to General Schwarzkopf
and of course at that time it was pretty much a high security deal and we just kind
of pulled pull perimeter guard on the airfield right but you can say that you were
there when yeah I was the end was planned when the end was to go shaded and
agreed upon yeah after everything was said and done General Schwarzkopf pulled
the whole unit by and said you boys did a really fine job and to reward you
what do you guys want we said we want some hamburgers or some mistakes so he
sent up I think three refrauer try treathers full of four meat right and some beer
right what kind Schlitz near beer but hey it was wet right yeah that was all that
was all was we've got a couple of minutes left and and I'm glad we do tell
us about your granddad well I've got a long long history of a family that has
served that's kind of what many is patriotic as I am but my biological
grandfather was a shot down in war two he was a navigator in a B29 shot down
over Japan over the island of Kaio Shoe was taken to Kaio Shoe University in
where he was a vivisection which means dissected by the by the Japanese
University there right and there was a book written about that as a matter of
fact yeah and you have that books a matter of fact we got a picture here of the
cover of that book and that's it right there only that on the screen for a
second is called of the fall as you can see a true story of American POW
some Japanese wartime atrocities and that was his unit and that is your
biological granddad top row on the right top row on the right kind of like he's
got his hand in a shirt there and that was taken at Guam probably not too long
before they were shot down I mean I'm not gonna say how how soon because I'm
not really sure when that picture was taken but I know they weren't on Guam very
long right right and your your grandmother of course after this happened
remarried to the man that you knew as your granddad of course but this is
certainly a history of World War II and a book written that's certainly
obviously very very meaningful to you still the greatest generation exactly
exactly that's very impressive your past commander of VFW post 4692
something that you're very proud of and we can do a whole other show about what
the VFW does and but in the few seconds that we have left talk a little bit
about the VFW because I know that you're trying to bring in younger and younger
members well the VFW's goal in life is to under the dead by serving the living
and our goals are to take care of the soldiers today and the people coming
back make sure they have easy transitions we're big proponents with the
political action community in Washington DC where we fight for a GI Bill and
and VA raises and in compensation for disabled vets there's there's there's
so much we do plus we do a lot of the the locally in town here we do youth
programs like the voice democracy and the Patriots pin teacher of the year
fireman firefighter the year there's a lot we do locally too to try to help
again you know to honor the day by serving the living thank you for your service
thank you sir operation desert storm will not take up a vast number of pages
in our grandchildren's history books but for the men and women who fought it and
the families who waited it out its memory will be one of a lifetime Bob Rooner is
one of the thousands brave stories from that Gulf War of 91 we salute him and
all veterans join us next time on Veterans of the Valley